My thoughts, maybe useless:

There is this youtube video of Feynman explaining QED to some people at some sort of meditation retreat. I think the explanation is basically the same one as he gives in his short book on QED. Anyway, as preliminary material he provides a good illustration of the limitations of using what amounts to non-mathematical language to describe models that are built to calculate something  precisely.

The example refers to how in the Mayan culture, the more sophisticated priest/scientists had worked out ways of predicting the motion of Venus, but this involved arithmetic which could not be explained to the "normal" people. So what they said instead was "here is a bowl of beans. Every day take one bean out, and when the bowl is empty Venus will be visible." So they had computed some appropriate constant period for the motion, and just found and easy, but shallow, way to convey this information to the people who would not know the "whole" answer.

He then goes on to explain various QED-related phenomena with a pretty clever mechanical model involving rotating arrows, always being careful to note that the audience now understands *some* of the answer but not *all* of the answer. His arrow explanation of QED gives a bit of the flavor of various things that are going on (path integrals, wave functions, the role of phase in quantum behaviors, etc) but he never gives the audience the tools that they need to actually use the theory to predict anything, because to do that you have to use the math.

In this sense I don't completely understand the various calls here to "step away from the math" or "figure out what we are really talking about". The way I see it what we are really talking about it pretty clear: we are trying to explain the results of experiments, and the results of experiments in quantum mechanics are pretty odd. The mathematics is the deepest and most precise model that we have for showing why the experiments come out this way. You can try to frame less technical and more "intuitive" explanations for these things, but they will inevitably lack the precision needed to make actual predictions unless they fit into the mathematical structures that people can use to make calculations. That's just the reality of it. It may seem unsatisfyingly abstract, but it's the best answer we have.

The other bad analogy that I was going to bring up goes like this: this is like trying to figure out what's really going on in a computer program that you use. You can use its user interface to model some behaviors. You can even instrument it in various ways to watch what it does w.r.t the rest of your system. But the only way to know precisely is to find someone with the source code and check (and even that might not be enough, if the program uses libraries for which you don't have the source). 

You might decry this and say "well, that makes computer programs too hard to understand" ... but that doesn't change the fact that if you want the most detailed understanding of what is going on then that description will be in terms of what seems like a lot of weird abstract nonsense. Not exactly math, but similar.

The relationship between "plain language" explanations of science and the actual theories is similar in some ways, and different in others. Analogies and natural language only go so far.